# where_to_plant_trees

This is the code used for the paper entitled: Monitoring canopy quality and improving equitable outcomes of urban tree planting using LiDAR and machine learning https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1618866723002868

### Abstract
Urban tree canopies are fundamental to mitigating the impacts of climate change within cities as well as providing a range of other important ecosystem, health, and amenity benefits. However, urban tree planting initiatives do not typically utilize data about both the horizontal and vertical dimensions of the tree canopy, despite height being a critical determinant of the quality and value of urban canopy cover. We present a novel pipeline that uses airborne LiDAR data to train a multi-task machine learning model to generate estimates of both canopy cover and height in urban areas. We apply this to multi-source multi-spectral imagery for the case study of Chicago, USA. Our results indicate that a multi-task UNet convolutional neural network can be used to generate reliable estimates of canopy cover and height from aerial and satellite imagery. We then use these canopy estimates to allocate 75,000 trees from Chicago’s recent green initiative under four scenarios, minimizing the urban heat island effect and then optimizing for an equitable canopy distribution, comparing results when only canopy cover is used, and when both canopy cover and height are considered. Through the introduction of this novel pipeline, we show that including canopy height within decision-making processes allows the distribution of new trees to be optimised to further reduce the urban heat island effect in localities where trees have the highest cooling potential and allows trees to be more equitably distributed to communities with lower quality canopies.

### Data Used
The amount of data used in this paper was well over 2 tb, so while of the data is open and freely available, retreiving the data will be left as an excercise for any reader wishing to replicate the paper. Links for the data can be found in the data_sources md file. I have included as much of the code I could wrangle together that was used in this paper and have attempted to organize it in as sensible way as possible.
